---
title: Debt Collective participates in statewide campaign to eliminate fines, fees
  and bail in California
date: 2018-10-31 17:55:00 Z
---

On October 29th and 30th The Debt Collective partnered with activist groups in Los Angeles including [Youth Justice Coalition](http://www.youth4justice.org/), [All of Us or None](https://www.prisonerswithchildren.org/our-projects/allofus-or-none/), [Homeboy Industries](https://www.homeboyindustries.org/), A [New Way of Life Reentry Project,](http://anewwayoflife.org/) [Community Coalition ](http://cocosouthla.org/)and more to launch a statewide campaign to eliminate fines, fees and bail in California. 

With rallying cries of Freedom Should Be Free, and Debt Free Justice, the event was held at Chuco’s Justice Center in Inglewood, CA. Most organizers and participants--young and old--were people whose lives have been deeply affected by the human caging system and who are now dealing with often insurmountable debts. 

Young people shared stories of their parents being charged thousands of dollars for mandated ankle bracelets and community service (yes, paying for community service). Most families did not have thousands of dollars available and often borrowed money in an effort to pay or continue to endure ongoing harassment by the courts in the form of fines and fees and late fees and penalties. One young woman’s mother was sick when her daughter got in trouble with the system. She simply could not afford her own medical care and her daughter’s fines and fees at the same time. Another man who had been incarcerated for fifteen years recounted that his fines and fees while inside caused his mother to lose their family home. Still others told stories about how the system steals both freedom and money from impoverished, mostly black and brown communities: people paying fees and fines not only to the court system (the state) but also to immigrant detention facilities (usually privately run, for-profit companies). Everyone explained how they experienced the criminalization of poverty: when you get out, you have all these debts, and you can’t get a job because no one will hire people just getting out of jail. Often your license is also suspended. Many people talked about feeling like the fines and fees and their inability to get jobs together pushed them back to the streets to find money by any means necessary. 

All wanted to make a life and few had the support and the ability to do so. Many people were struggling with medical debt, housing debt, predatory payday loans, subprime auto loans, defaulted credit card debt and we even met one woman who went to for-profit Everest College, which had a long history of scamming students. This former student had yet to learn about Defense To Repayment, the law that says you have a right to debt relief if your school defrauded you. Debt Collective organizers shared that information with her. 

People who are struggling with court fees and fines are also drowning in debt for their basic needs like healthcare and education. People are trapped in different types of debts, some debts that can’t be repaid have sent people to jail. We talked about the fact that it’s immoral to send people to jail for being poor. And the feelings of shame and anger when that happens to someone. 

The Monday convening featured a “living library” where people shared stories of how system debt had impacted them and their families, panel discussions on bail debt and fines and fees, and a participatory activity around jail abolition vs. jail reform. During this time the Debt Collective and several pro bono lawyers also worked with individuals in another room to help them begin the process of disputing their bail debts and all the other debts that make their lives impossible to live, including housing debt, medical debt, payday lending debt and utility bills. 

These conversations allowed many people to start disputes on the Debt Collective’s new online platform. The day ended with action planning for a press conference the next day as well as a public comment period at the LA Board of Supervisors meeting. At the meeting both young people and adults testified to the board of supervisors on how their families had to choose between medical care and court debt, a roof over their heads and court debt. One person testified that getting already-poor people to pay these debts was like “squeezing blood from a turnip.” 

